---
layout: post
title: Now Powered By Jekyll and GitHub Pages
description: "A few of my previous posts have been fortunate enough to become front-page worthy on Hacker News and /r/programming. But the rush of traffic toppled my WordPress blog. So I toppled WordPress and replaced it with Jekyll."
categories : [github]
---
My previous blog post on `git add -p` hit the front page of [Hacker News](http://news.ycombinator.com/) and [/r/programming](http://www.reddit.com/r/programming) and the huge influx of traffic brought down my blog. This had happened once before, ironically when a previous git post of mine hit HN, but I thought [Chris](http://twitter.com/tidrion) and I had prevented it from happening again by using the WP-Cache WordPress plugin.

Well looks like those sites sent so much traffic our 512MB server running Apache + MySQL + WP-Cache still couldn't keep up.

That's impressive considering when the same post was on the front page of [/r/programming](http://reddit.com/r/programming) it did about 20,000 views all together, 15,000 of which during one day. I guess front page of HN at noon CST on a Monday lands you a lot of traffic really fast.

### Peace out WordPress ###

So in the interest of not investing more time battling outdated WordPress versions and a bunch of dynamic functionality I simply didn't need, and a desire to learn a bit more Ruby, I've decided to move this blog and the rest of my personal site to be generated by [Jekyll](https://github.com/mojombo/jekyll).

This now means all of my posts are written in a text editor, formatted in Markdown, stored in a git repository, compiled to static HTML using Jekyll, then deployed via `git push`.

My content is no longer held hostage, holed up in some remote database. It's in plain-text, in a version control repository, where it belongs.

### Migrating WordPress to Jekyll ###

WordPress has built-in export functionality, which dumps all of your pages, posts and comments to XML. It's conveniently accessible from the admin panel at `/wp-admin/export.php`.

The Jekyll docs have a section on [Blog Migrations](https://github.com/mojombo/jekyll/wiki/blog-migrations). I followed the instructions to exchange my newly-generated `wordpress.xml` into freshly-minted static HTML pages in a format Jekyll expects.

{% highlight console %}
gem install hpricot
ruby -rubygems -e 'require "jekyll/migrators/wordpressdotcom"; Jekyll::WordpressDotCom.process("wordpress.xml")'
{% endhighlight %}

I then leveraged [Pandoc](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/) to convert the resulting HTML files to straight Markdown.

{% highlight console %}
cd ~/Sites/johnkary.github.com/_posts
pandoc --from=html --to=markdown --no-wrap --output=2009-12-08-my-post-title.md 2009-12-08-my-post-title.html
{% endhighlight %}

The Pandoc-generated Markdown files were very accurate for the most part. The only fail was I had to re-split the paragraph text because the original Jekyll import dumped my paragraphs without `<p>` tags, so Pandoc just merged that text together. This was a result of how the text was stored in the WordPress database. I also had to clean up some poor formatting from some older posts, but nothing major for my 20 blog entries.

### Development Mode ###

When I'm developing on my site, I run the built-in Jekyll web server then load the site in my browser at http://0.0.0.0:4000

{% highlight console %}
cd ~/Sites/johnkary.github.com
jekyll --server --auto
{% endhighlight %}

`--server` tells Jekyll to run its WEBrick web server (instead of just generating the site).

`--auto` tells Jekyll to watch my source files for changes, and regenerate my site files on save. So if I'm writing a new blog post or editing CSS and save my file, Jekyll regenerates the corresponding static file.

### Liquid Templating Language ###

Jekyll uses the [Liquid Templating Language](http://liquidmarkup.org/). I felt very at home with it right away because it's basically exactly like [Twig Templates](http://twig.sensiolabs.org/doc/templates.html). And Twig is inspired by Jinja2 templates, which uses the same syntax. I don't know who was "first" in all of this, but there was no additional learning curve for me in learning the templating syntax.

### Syntax Highlighting ###

Jekyll has support for the great syntax highlighting Python library [Pygments](http://pygments.org/), which probably supports every language you know.

It supports PHP, but I had to dig around a bit to find its PhpLexer option `startinline`. If you don't specify the `startinline` option, Pygments will only start highlighting after it finds `<?php`. I don't use `<?php` in my code examples, so my highlighting wasn't working until I found [this Jekyll issue](https://github.com/mojombo/jekyll/issues/31) introducing `startinline` functionality.

{% highlight jinja %}
{% raw %}
{% highlight php %}
// No source highlighting
$name = $person->getName();
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight php startinline %}
// Source highlighting without opening PHP tag
$name = $person->getName();
{% endhighlight %}
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}

### Redirects From Old Site ###

A number of my blog posts have been picked up on various link portals over the years, and people regularly find my posts using Google. If I took my new blogging engine and gave no care to redirect to the new post URL I would lose my search engine rankings. Google would likely see my new posts as simply new content with no credibility.

Instead I'm choosing a two-headed approach:

1. Use Apache's `.htaccess` file to explicitly use `301 Redirects` to the new URLs. This will tell Google and other crawlers the page has permanently moved. I have then instructed the Google crawler to re-crawl my site to pickup the new URLs. Given a few weeks to a month, my new URLs should reflect in search engines.
2. Use a Jekyll plugin called [alias_generator](https://github.com/tsmango/jekyll_alias_generator) to generate an `index.html` page at the old URL which has a meta-redirect to the new page.

Yes, a meta-redirect is not ideal and isn't good practice. But in the long-term I hope to move my site to be powered by [GitHub Pages](http://pages.github.com/), which doesn't support `.htaccess` or other means of redirects. It's at this point that anyone still linking to my old posts can still find their way to the new path.

This alias_generator plugin parses an `alias:` key in your YAML Front Matter, which is just some YAML in the heading of every Jekyll template file. This per-file configuration allows you to configure how the page is rendered.

Installing this custom plugin is easy. Just copy it into `./_plugins/alias_generator.rb` and Jekyll will pick up any file ending in `./_plugins/*.rb` when compiling.

To setup the "redirect", let's use my example blog post previously at <http://johnkary.net/git-add-p-the-most-powerful-git-feature-youre-not-using-yet/>. I can use the following `alias:` key and Jekyll will generate an HTML page at `./git-add-p-the-most-powerful-git-feature-youre-not-using-yet/index.html` which redirects to the new post's URL.

{% highlight yaml %}
layout: post
title: ! "git add -p: The most powerful git feature you're not using yet"
status: publish
type: post
published: true
alias: /git-add-p-the-most-powerful-git-feature-youre-not-using-yet
{% endhighlight %}

The plugin then sticks an HTML file at the path specified and anyone encountering that page will be forwarded to the new URL.

{% highlight html %}
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
<link rel="canonical" href="/2012/10/30/git-add-p-the-most-powerful-git-feature-youre-not-using-yet.html"/>
<meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8" />
<meta http-equiv="refresh" content="0;url=/2012/10/30/git-add-p-the-most-powerful-git-feature-youre-not-using-yet.html" />
</head>
</html>
{% endhighlight %}

### That's It! ###

Overall I'm really happy with this new setup. I feel much more in control of my site, and am much more comfortable writing into a text editor with vim bindings than a WordPress textarea.

As I said, I'm hoping to move to GitHug Pages in the future, mostly for automatic deployment when pushing to the repository. I looked at [Octopress](http://octopress.org/) but felt it did too much for what I wanted to accomplish. I wanted a more micro-approach.

I may also redesign the site at some point in the future, maybe to make it responsive, but right now double-tapping on the content body it's still very readable and focuses only on the content.

If you see any problems with my site, please ping me on Twitter [@johnkary](http://twitter.com/johnkary)
